Robert Law: 08/03/2021

TITLE: Distributed temperature sensing data from a borehole drilled to the base of Sermeq Kujalleq (Store Glacier), Greenland, in July 2019

ABSTRACT: This is distributed temperature sensing (DTS) data from a 1,043 m borehole drilled to the base of Sermeq Kujalleq (Store Glacier), Greenland, 28 km inland from the glacier terminus. The DTS system was installed on 5 July 2019, with recordings continuing until cable failure on 13 August 2019. The record resolution is ~0.65 m.

GITHUB REPOSITORY: This contains ONLY the scripts that can be used to produce the figures in Law et al. (2021). The data can be found via the Polar Data Centre

FUNDING SOURCE: This work was primarily funded and conducted as part of the European Research Council RESPONDER project (https://www.erc-responder.eu/) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (Grant 683043). RL was supported by Natural Environment Research Council Doctoral Training Partnership studentships (Grant NE/L002507/1).

KEYWORDS: Greenland, distributed temperature sensing (DTS), ice boreholes, Store Glacier, marine-terminating glacier, ice temperature

PERSONNEL:
	NAME: Robert Law
	ROLE: ContactPerson, DataCollector, DataCurator, ProjectMember
	ORGANISATION: Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-0067-5537
	
	NAME: Poul Christoffersen
	ROLE: ProjectLeader, ProjectManager
	ORGANISATION: Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0003-2643-8724
	
	NAME: Bryn Hubbard
	ROLE: ProjectManager 
	ORGANISATION: Centre for Glaciology, Aberystwyth University
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-3565-3875
	
	NAME: Samuel Doyle
	ROLE: DataCollector, ProjectMember
	ORGANISATION: Centre for Glaciology, Aberystwyth University
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-0853-431X
	
	NAME: Thomas R Chudley
	ROLE: ProjectMember
	ORGANISATION: Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-8547-1132
	
	NAME: Charlotte Schoonman
	ROLE: ProjectMember
	ORGANISATION: Alfred-Wegener-Institut/Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-2882-9916
	
	NAME: Adam Booth
	ROLE: ProjectMember
	ORGANISATION: University of Leeds
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0002-8166-9608
	
	NAME: Tun Jan Young
	ROLE: ProjectMember
	ORGANISATION: Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge
	ORCID: orcid.org/0000-0001-5865-3459
	
LINEAGE/METHODOLOGY: The data was gathered from Store Glacier, Greenland, in 2019 using a borehole drilling system as described in Doyle et al. (2018) with an additional heater unit. Drilling occured from 4-5 July 2019. The vertical spatial resolution is ~0.65 m, with a sampling resolution of 0.25 m. The measurement averaging time was originally set at 2 minutes with near continuous operation from 5 July to 21 July whereupon it was set to 10 minutes with a rest time of 40 minutes, with the rest time increased to 4 hours on 23rd July to reduce power consumption for unattended operation. This raw instrument-produced data was then processed using the DTS processing package 'dtsalibration' written in Python (des Tombe et al., 2020) with the sampling time increased dependent on usage/figure output (8 hours for image plot of entire record, 96 hours for final plot before failure).

INSTRUMENTATION: The data was collected with a Silixa XT-DTS. The cable was a BRUsens DTS steel-armored cable with 2 single-mode (OS2) fibres and 4 multi-mode (OM3) fibres in a dublex arrangement using a basal turnaround assemblage. The single-mode fibres were used in a seperate distributed acoustic sensing study (Booth et al., 2020). The dtscalibration Python package (v0.9.2) was used to process the data (https://python-dts-calibration.readthedocs.io/ https://pypi.org/project/dtscalibration/ https://github.com/dtscalibration/python-dts-calibration). Data sheets are provided where possible in the data_sheets directory.

QUALITY: The data was calibrated using thermistor data and temperate ice at the phase-transition temperature. 95% confidence intervals are reported in Law et al. (2021) and are provided in this data set, derived from a Monte Carlo simulation. The data was fitted to thermistors, subjectivity in this fitting, and thermistor uncertainty from factors such as ice-bath calibration may further increase unertainty - see Law et al. (2021) for a full discussion. 

RELATED URLS: https://www.spri.cam.ac.uk/people/law/ https://www.spri.cam.ac.uk/people/christoffersen/ https://www.erc-responder.eu/ 

TEMPORAL COVERAGE: 07:45 5 July 2019 - 21:30 13 August 2019.

SPATIAL COVERAGE: 70.57 N, 50.09 W 

RESOLUTION: ~0.65 m spatial resolution.

LOCATION: Sermeq Kujalleq (Store Glacier), Uummannaq Fjord, Greenland. Drill site at 70.57 N, 50.09 W.

REFERENCES:
	
Booth, A. D., Christoffersen, P., Schoonman, C., Clarke, A., Hubbard, B., Law, R., Doyle, S. H., Chudley, T. R., & Chalari, A. (2020). Distributed Acoustic Sensing of Seismic Properties in a Borehole Drilled on a Fast‐Flowing Greenlandic Outlet Glacier. Geophysical Research Letters, 47(13), e2020GL088148. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL088148

des Tombe, B., Schilperoort, B., Perkó, Z., Bakker, M., Van De Giesen, N., & Selker, J. (2019). Distributed Temperature Sensing (DTS) calibration with confidence intervals. European Geophysical Union, Geophysical Research Abstracts, 21, 2019–16681. https://doi.org/10.3390/s20082235 

Doyle, S. H., Hubbard, B., Christoffersen, P., Young, T. J., Hofstede, C., Bougamont, M., Box, J. E., & Hubbard, A. (2018). Physical Conditions of Fast Glacier Flow: 1. Measurements From Boreholes Drilled to the Bed of Store Glacier, West Greenland. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface, 123(2), 324–348. https://doi.org/10.1002/2017JF004529

Law, R., Christoffersen, P., Hubbard, B., Doyle, S. H., Chudley, T. R., Schoonman, C., Bougamont, M., des Tombe, B., Schilperoort, B., Kechavarzi, C., Booth, A., & Young, T. J. (2021). Thermodynamics of a fast-moving Greenlandic outlet glacier revealed by fiber-optic distributed temperature sensing. Minor revisions in Science Advances.

DATA STRUCTURE AND DATA FORMAT: The data is stored in a few different ways:
	raw data is provided as (DTS) machine outputted .xmls found in the directories:
		/channel_1 (5.4 GB) raw data spanning the entire measurement period from channel one of the DTS machine, subdivided into .xmls with equal number of samples* and averaging period.
		/channel_3 (4.6 GB) raw data spanning the entire measurement period from channel one of the DTS machine, subdivided into .xmls with equal number of samples* and averaging period.
		/channel_1_civil_eng (43 MB) raw data from experiments at Cambridge Univeristy Civil Engineering Building to determine integrated differential attenuation-strain relationship.
		/channel_1_SPRI_basement (944 KB) measurements used in laboratory calibration of the cable zeta parameter. 
		/processed_data (4.7 GB) the processed raw data for figure plotting with Python consisting of: 
			DataSet_ST_data_ch1.nc (2.5 GB) and DataSet_ST_data_ch3.nc (2.4 GB)(NetCDF) uncalibrated (anti-)Stokes data from the DTS used in calculating integrated differential attenuation for DTS channels 1 and 3 respectively.
			ch1_full_processed.nc (42 MB)(NetCDF) fully processed temperature data for full measurement period for channel 1 for figure plotting use.
			ch1_end_processed.nc (0.3 MB) (NetCDF) fully processed temperature data for final 96 hours of measurement period for channel 1.
		/Doyle_data/analog_blue.csv (csv) csv data for thermistors from Samuel Doyle.

The processed data can be viewed using the Python files in the root directory. The packages used in the creation of these scripts are found within Python_env_packages.txt . dtscalibration is dependent on specific versions of some packages, so if you are having trouble getting things going I recommend checking your package versions.

If you are just wish to visualise the data, then use 3_plotting.py which will produce the figures used in the publication unless ch1_full_processed.nc or ch1_end_processed.nc have been overwritten.
Running 1_full_process.py and 2_end_profile will overwrite ch1_full_processed.nc and ch1_end_processed.nc respectively. As supplied, if you do generate new files they should be identical to the ones already present. These files are probably most helpful if you wanted to process a new DTS dataset and needed an example, though better guidance on the dtscalibration package is avaiable at: https://github.com/dtscalibration/python-dts-calibration/tree/master/examples . A full processing run through takes about 30 mins on a 2018 i7 processor. 
		
		
*sample number varies from 11078 to 11079, probably a result of a minor change in fibre refractive index with temperature. The dtscalibration package is not yet adapted to account for these variations automatically. 

ACCESS CONSTRAINTS: There are no access constraints.

USER CONSTRAINTS: This data is supplied under the Open Government Licence:
	You are encouraged to use and re-use the Information that is available under this licence freely and flexibly, with only a few conditions.

	Using Information under this licence
	Use of copyright and database right material expressly made available under this licence (the ‘Information’) indicates your acceptance of the terms and conditions below.

	The Licensor grants you a worldwide, royalty-free, perpetual, non-exclusive licence to use the Information subject to the conditions below.

	This licence does not affect your freedom under fair dealing or fair use or any other copyright or database right exceptions and limitations.

	You are free to:
	copy, publish, distribute and transmit the Information;
	adapt the Information;
	exploit the Information commercially and non-commercially for example, by combining it with other Information, or by including it in your own product or application.
	You must, where you do any of the above:
	acknowledge the source of the Information by including any attribution statement specified by the Information Provider(s) and, where possible, provide a link to this licence;
	 If the Information Provider does not provide a specific attribution statement, or if you are using Information from several Information Providers and multiple attributions are not practical in your product or application, you may use the following:

	 Contains public sector information licensed under the Open Government Licence v2.0.

	These are important conditions of this licence and if you fail to comply with them the rights granted to you under this licence, or any similar licence granted by the Licensor, will end automatically.

	 Exemptions
	This licence does not cover:

	personal data in the Information;
	information that has neither been published nor disclosed under information access legislation (including the Freedom of Information Acts for the UK and Scotland) by or with the consent of the Information Provider;
	departmental or public sector organisation logos, crests and the Royal Arms except where they form an integral part of a document or dataset;
	military insignia;
	third party rights the Information Provider is not authorised to license;
	other intellectual property rights, including patents, trade marks, and design rights; and
	identity documents such as the British Passport
	Non-endorsement
	This licence does not grant you any right to use the Information in a way that suggests any official status or that the Information Provider endorses you or your use of the Information.

	Non warranty
	The Information is licensed ‘as is’ and the Information Provider excludes all representations, warranties, obligations and liabilities in relation to the Information to the maximum extent permitted by law.

	The Information Provider is not liable for any errors or omissions in the Information and shall not be liable for any loss, injury or damage of any kind caused by its use. The Information Provider does not guarantee the continued supply of the Information.

	Governing Law
	This licence is governed by the laws of the jurisdiction in which the Information Provider has its principal place of business, unless otherwise specified by the Information Provider.

	Definitions
	In this licence, the terms below have the following meanings:

	‘Information’
	means information protected by copyright or by database right (for example, literary and artistic works, content, data and source code) offered for use under the terms of this licence.

	‘Information Provider’
	means the person or organisation providing the Information under this licence.

	‘Licensor’
	means any Information Provider who has the authority to offer Information under the terms of this licence. It includes the Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office, who has the authority to offer Information subject to Crown copyright and Crown database rights, and Information subject to copyright and database rights which have been assigned to or acquired by the Crown, under the terms of this licence.

	‘Use’
	means doing any act which is restricted by copyright or database right, whether in the original medium or in any other medium, and includes without limitation distributing, copying, adapting, modifying as may be technically necessary to use it in a different mode or format.

	‘You’
	means the natural or legal person, or body of persons corporate or incorporate, acquiring rights under this licence.

	About the Open Government Licence
	The Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office (HMSO) has developed this licence as a tool to enable Information Providers in the public sector to license the use and re-use of their Information under a common open licence. The Controller invites public sector bodies owning their own copyright and database rights to permit the use of their Information under this licence.

	The Controller of HMSO has authority to license Information subject to copyright and database right owned by the Crown. The extent of the Controller’s offer to license this Information under the terms of this licence is set out on The National Archives website.

	This is version 2.0 of the Open Government Licence. The Controller of HMSO may, from time to time, issue new versions of the Open Government Licence. If you are already using Information under a previous version of the Open Government Licence, the terms of that licence will continue to apply.

	These terms are compatible with the Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 and the Open Data Commons Attribution License, both of which license copyright and database rights. This means that when the Information is adapted and licensed under either of those licences, you automatically satisfy the conditions of the OGL when you comply with the other licence. The OGLv2.0 is Open Definition compliant.

	Further context, best practice and guidance can be found in the UK Government Licensing Framework section on The National Archives website.

